---
title: "The evolution of Hospital Architecture from the Beginning to the Present Day : Koç University Hospital"
classes: wide
date: 2018-12-20
categories:
  - Hospital
tags:
  - Architecture
  - KUH
  - Hospitals
---

One of the oldest jobs is healing people, saving them from their pain, illnesses, so one of the earliest architectural forms arose as a space for healing people which we call a hospital. Ancient civilization thought that pain, illnesses are due to the bad spirit or punishment of gods, so the healing job was done by religious people or elderly leader in ancient time and this type of healing process did not require any kind of special building. However, some civilization such that Greeks, Romans tried to heal people not just via pray or spiritual power, also via some herbal syrups and animals. Therefore, the need for special enclosed areas for healing process appeared. Medicine has changed from centuries to centuries and we have evidence-based medicine nowadays. Until this time, medicine witnesses several theories about illnesses and their cures and every theory about healing process come with its own unique need for space or structural element which leads to experimentation of hospital architecture. Therefore, the architecture of a hospital has mainly changed from time to time to meet the requirement of the healing process. "The connection between health and architecture has been long established, with medical and architectural professions both aware of the importance of appropriate building in the mitigation of ill health." (Cameron Logan, 2010) Thus, it can be concluded that hospitals' architecture is based on its function which arises from accepted healing process of the era while using the local architectural elements of the era as an example of eclecticism.
     In this paper, I am planning to begin with how Greeks Hospital, Asklepion, arose and how they use the space for the medical purpose. Then, I will continue with Ottoman's Hospitals and how Ottoman Empire applied healing process and how this influence the use of space and form of hospital. I will finish my paper by discussing the architecture of the Koç University Hospital as a contemporary example of the hospital in Istanbul.
     Asklepion was one of the first examples of the hospital architectural form in Anatolia. Asklepion have a great significance in emerging hospital typology because before Greek medicine, illnesses cured without need of the specific place. After Greeks began to apply 3 steps healing process which includes sleep, fitness, and snake bite to cure diseases, there was a necessity of building which could provide suitable areas for these procedures. (Kuskonmaz, 2016) For example, the sleeping room of Asklepion was preferably larger than other rooms and more enclosed areas to make patients sleep easily while fitness areas in Asklepion are more dynamic and open areas. Even though the Asklepion’s architecture varies from one example to another, it is important to see the use of columns is common among them. When Greeks created Asklepion, they also use architectural elements of the classic Greek architecture to create new spaces for new functions as seen in the figure. Thus, Asklepion was not just a building which has naos and columns, they are the first functional unit of hospital typology which arose from the need of structure for the specific purpose.
     In the Ottoman Era, medicine showed enormous improvement in the healing process of mental disease which followed by the change of hospital architecture in Ottoman Empire. Ottoman doctor tried to cure mentally retarded people via music and water sound in the hospital. Using music and water sound are some of the techniques that we are using even today. Because of the change in healing techniques, hospital architecture evolved the way that it can provide these functions. Therefore, we began to see a more integrated hospital in a way that integrated both with the sound of city and nature. While the hospital was evolving, it also used the architectural elements from Islamic traditions. For example, use of fountain in the Darusifa, Ottoman Hospital, is one of the examples of deriving architectural elements from Islamic architecture to use for the new function. In the Ottoman Era, the first hospital was constructed in 1399 and it called Yildirim Darusifasi. After that, many were constructed on several sides of the Empire and one thing common among them was compartmentalization. (Öztürk & Şaylıgil, 2015) Because Islamic medicine had a great amount of information about an eye, and some surgery technics, Islamic doctors began to operate surgery and using different technics to heal diseases. Therefore, a need of compartmentalization arises in Ottoman Hospitals, and we can see one of the first examples of first functional compartmentalization in Ottoman period. Compartmentalization is needed because of a need for a different function in a single building with the development of knowledge about medicine. Moreover, training and research was done in this building which is called as Madrasah. It is fair to say that madrasah of Ottoman Empire is today’s school of medicine, so the idea of using hospital buildings as a traning and research center is coming from the Madrasah of the Ottomans. (Öztürk & Şaylıgil, 2015) Thus, compartmentalization of the hospital buildings also led to emerging of new functions such that training and research.
     After World War II, hospital and medicine changed drastically. New achievements in science led to emerging of evidence-based medicine so that bacteria, parasites, surgery, imaging technologies and much more are known. With the devastating effects of WWs, and change in medical knowledge led to the transformation of the hospital into a new form. "The various currents in post Second World War hospital architecture have shared one central aim: to ‘normalize' the healthcare environment." Architects aimed that new hospitals look likes office blocks, shopping malls, zoned campus with a distinctly local feel. (Peters & Adams, 2017) With the effect of modernization and use of steel and reinforced concrete, new hospitals were constructed as a giant building includes several compartments. Obviously, steel and improving construction techniques enable architects to cover the hospital with glass which will allow the passage of light into the hospital. Light is seen as a healer or related to good spirit even in old ages, and no one could deny the positive effects of light on a mood of a human. Because mood of a patient is very crucial for a fight against disease and resistance of the body, it cannot be thought that hospital can be constructed via the way that light cannot pass inside it nowadays. Therefore, a mall-type hospital has increased rapidly after the mid-1950s due to the need of compartmentalization and use of light for normalization. "One advantage that hospitals of this period had over retail malls was their use of daylight and views as a wayfinding strategy and partner to medical treatment. Whereas in malls, disorientation can lead to spontaneous shopping, getting lost in hospitals can be problematic." (Peters & Adams, 2017) Even though the emergence of the mall-type hospital is great achievement and transformation in the architecture of hospital, it exists with the problem of getting lost in the hospital. Now, hospital is not only building that treatment process is applied in, it is also the place that makes a patient more enthusiastic and better about future and their health. Because of these architectural changes, people have begun to see hospitals as normal as a shopping mall.
Koç University Hospital
    One of the contemporary examples of hospital architecture in Istanbul is Koc University Hospital (KUH) which became operational in September 2014 as a research and training hospital. Its modern looking and glass covering appears as a residence or mall type hospital in first glance, however, it differs from others because this building is not functioning only as a hospital, also as a research and training center which indicates its roots of Ottoman’s madrasah in this building. In Istanbul, we have different architectural examples of University Hospital, however, none of them is a single architectural unit. Other University Hospital has generally preferred separate buildings and an even architectural element for different functions such as research, clinics, classroom, etc. One of the greatest achievement which architecture and designers of KUH are done is integrating and unifying the different functioning units into one structural building as seen in the figure. They literally melted different functioning and structural elements in the same pot and created this gigantic building "that spans over an area of 220.000 m2 includes the school of medicine, the school of nursing, research laboratories, the Advanced Learning Center, and general hospital." (KUH, 2017)
     In this architectural structure, we can observe the compartmentalization which we saw in Darusifa. However, this compartmentalization is not static like another hospital or historical examples. I interview with Birkan Kankatan who is one of the architectures of Koc University Hospital. As he stated that they as a architectural team tried to create an enclosed space that could serve several different functions, so that they used 9*9 axes system between two columns. It could be put one surgery operation room, or three cars park area, or two different patient rooms, etc. between two axes. Because of this dynamic compartmentalization, it is predicted that hospital will not need any expansion or new buildings for new functions in the future, it could change within the current structure. Therefore, it can be said that hospital architecture response the evolving medical science. Because science and medicine change significantly from year to year, hospital architecture has begun to gain more dynamic compartmentalization rather than static one as we see in Ottoman period.
     Use of light is also a second important aspect of the architecture of KUH. Even though the use of light in hospital architecture is a common feature after WWs, the way that light use in KUH is extraordinary. The mall-like hospital is aimed to capture light, but also KUH has one more different element which ensures that light can go into the building even to the basement floor. KUH has two atriums and two inner gardens in it. As the architecture stated that they wanted use basement floors, and they created an inner garden with full of glass covering which will ensure the natural light transmission to even basement floors. However, hospital building is in the factory area which is not suitable for the idea of normalizing of hospital architecture. Mr. Kankatan stated that they created space that does not interact with outside environment and ventilation is fully automatic and mechanical except the inner gardens and atriums. Both Asklepion and Darusifa has natural integration within the structure, also natural ventilation in the hospital is seen as a normalizing factor after WWs. Thus, most of the new examples of the hospitals have natural ventilation. "The local climate allows for natural ventilation in many of the building's interior public spaces, with fresh air delivered through the ends of its ‘branches' and through its vertical atriums." (Peters & Lyon, 2017) However, fresh air cannot distribute into the hospital through the vertical atriums of the KUH due to the location and inappropriate climate. Therefore, it can be concluded that surrounding environment and climate has great effects on the architecture of the hospital, especially about ventilation.
[gallery ids="896,897,898" type="rectangular" link="file" orderby="rand"]

Bibliography
Cameron Logan, J. W. (2010). International Travel as Medical Research: Architecture and the Modern Hospital. Health and History, 12(2), 116-133. doi:10.5401/healthhist.12.2.0116
KUH. (2017, December 2). Corporate - About Us. Retrieved from Koc University Hospital: http://kuh.ku.edu.tr/en/page/corporate/corporate-information/about-us
Kuskonmaz, Ş. (2016). Bergama’da İki Bin Yıllık Bir Hastane ve Bir Hekim: Asklepion ve Galen. Konuralp Tıp Dergisi, 8(2). doi:http://www.dx.doi.org/10.18521/ktd.99317
Öztürk, H., & Şaylıgil, Ö. (2015). From the Medicine in Ottoman Madrasahs to Faculty of Medicine. Konuralp Medical Journal, 7(3), 174-185.
Peters, T., & Adams, A. (2017, March-April). Decoding Modern Hospitals: An Architectural History. Architectural Design, 87(2), 16. doi:10.1002/ad.2148
Peters, T., & Lyon, C. (2017). Humanist Principles, Sustainable Design and Salutogenics: A New Form of Healthcare Architecture. Architectural Design, 87(2), 56. doi:10.1002/ad.2153
